Mrs. Bernice Serwaa Ofosuhene Peasah is a licensed Counseling Psychologist working at the KNUST Counseling Center (KCC). She joined KNUST Counseling Center, Kumasi in 2014
She has a sound knowledge of theoretical counseling approaches and their application to real world settings, having a special interest in cognitive behavioral therapy, integrative and youth counseling, relational/ marriage counseling, preventive, risk management and addiction therapy. In addition, she has competencies in crisis intervention/management, grief counseling and psychological assessment (psychometric measures). 
Cases she handles through Individual and Group counselling sessions include, but not limited to crises and grief counselling, trauma emergencies and risk management (e.g. career loss, accidents, rape, suicide, death and disclosure), psychosis (e.g. schizophrenia and personality disorders), mood disorders (depression and anxiety), self-esteem issues, academic challenges, adjustment issues, career counselling, emotional and interpersonal counselling, trainer of trainees/leaders for various organizations and substance related and addictive disorders therapy.
Mrs. Peasah served as the Coordinator/Sectional Head for the Peer Counseling Programme, a subsidiary group under KCC, for three years and was involved in the orientation, training and supervision of the large numbers of volunteering undergraduate students who formed the membership. She is the Coordinator/Sectional Head of the annual Counseling and Emotional Health Awareness/Promotion, KCC. She has served as a College Counsellor in the College of Engineering, College of Health Sciences, College of Agriculture and Natural Resources and the College of Science.
She is a member in good standing with the following International and National professional bodies: International Association for Counseling (IAC); American Psychological Association (APA); Ghana Psychology Council (GPC); Ghana Psychological Association (GPA); Ghana National Association of Certified Counselors (GNACC);International Society of Substance Use Professionals (ISSUP) and Ghana Association of University Administrators (GAUA). She has participated in various conferences in Ghana and internationally and has presented papers on counseling and mental health issues based on research.
Mrs Peasah is a Lady-Pastor, married to a Reverend Minister and blessed with four beautiful daughters.
